# PGxHT - Assessing the impact of genetics hypertension treatment response in Black South Africans
### Scripts and workflows used for my PhD project

## Abstract

**Hypertension is a condition characterized by persistently high blood pressure. Chronic hypertension increases the risk of kidney disease, heart disease, and stroke. Africa carries the largest burden of hypertension prevalence, morbidity, and mortality for hypertension and hypertension-related conditions. Many clinical trials conducted on various populations worldwide have identified diuretics and calcium channel blockers as the most effective drug classes for the reduction of blood pressure in African individuals and individuals of African descent. It is hypothesized that these drug classes are more effective than RAAS-targeting drug classes because hypertension in African (and African ancestry) populations is driven by salt sensitivity. The genetic contribution to this differential treatment response is not well known. Several GWAS and candidate gene studies have been conducted to investigate this, and several genetic variants have been associated with treatment response. Unfortunately, continental Africans are underrepresented in these studies, so the genetic impact on treatment response in this population is unknown. In this study, we conducted a candidate gene study to investigate the genetic variation in South African hypertensives through targetted NGS of 16 hydrochlorothiazide-related genes. The genes were chosen based on previously associated variants and genes in the hydrochlorothiazide mechanism of action pathway. The sequencing was done on the Illumina iSeq 100 platform. The reads were aligned to the hg38 reference genome. Joint calling was used to identify variants. VEP was used for annotation and Plink was used for association. We found that 7% of the variants (n=1258) were novel.  We found 8 variants with previous associations to hydrochlorothiazide response in European, American, and Asian populations. Our study highlights that the undiscovered genetic diversity in continental Africans potentially contributes response to hypertension treatment response.**
